#+TITLE:  Ruby on Ice – A quick glance at our budget
#+DATE: 2018-04-30
#+DRAFT: nil
#+TAGS: ruby rubyonice money budget rubyberlin

I wanted to to publish this blog post for a while now, but time 's been running
fast and now it's already three months since [[https://rubyonice.com/2018][Ruby
on Ice 2018]] took place. This isn't a recap – if you want to get a few
impressions, just scroll through the
[[https://twitter.com/hashtag/rubyonice2018][#rubyonice2018]] tweets.

[[file:http://rubyberlin.org/images/content/projects/rubyonice-2018.svg]]

This post should give you a quick recap of our conference budget planning for
Ruby on Ice 2018 and should help you as a conference organiser to put your own
budget in perspective and give some transparency to you as a conference
attendee. Note that this might not apply to large business conferences, but it
worked for us as a community-conference.

* Retrospective

We started planning for Ruby on Ice roughly one year ago - March / April 2017
with a core team of three people. We had the backing of the Berlin-based
Non-Profit [[https://rubyberlin.org/][Ruby Berlin e.V.]] that enabled us to have
a legal entity for running the conference, selling tickets + sponsorships.

A huge part of our planning time went into a huge Google Docs budget sheet. We
adapted it from [[https://twitter.com/fannivuniconnu][@fannivuniconnu's]]
version back from the eurucamp days and this was our guideline for all
decisions.

Our goal was to organise a community-run conference in the south of Germany with
the backdrop of the Alps – inviting Rubyists from all over the world but also
appealing to people from southern Germany, Austria and Switzerland who didn't
want to travel to Berlin all the time.

** Ticket sales vs. Sponsoring

This was the first big head scratcher. Ruby Berlin e.V. is a Non-Profit. Sounds
good, no? So at least we don't have to be profitable. Well. But we also should
not operate at a 100% loss, as we want to keep the Verein healthy.

I was involved in a lot of community-run conferences and used to ticket prices
somewhere between *60-100€* for a two day event. Now – since I moved to Munich,
I already expected it to be a bit more pricy, but the longer we shuffled around
numbers the more we realised that we would have to raise the ticket prices to
organise a conference with a balanced budget.

Speaking of balance – most conferences rely on two revenue streams: /Ticket
sales/ and /Sponsoring deals/. The first trap we probably stepped into was
assuming that we could smoothly fill all the missing budget parts with
sponsoring money.

Well. We couldn't.

*** On sponsoring »money«

It's easy to think of Sponsoring »money« as a regular part of your budget or as
some kind of benevolent donations. Except they're not. You _sell_ part of your
stage and attention to a sponsor and you get paid for goods and services. Even
though we're a Non-profit we have to pay taxes for those payments.

A good baseline we adapted from grooming our budget with
[[https://twitter.com/argorak][Florian]] was: 

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Try to cover the base line of your cost (food, venue) with regular ticket sales and use the sponsoring money to afford nice things on top of that.
#+END_QUOTE

In the end we still evened out at a rough =50:50= ratio:

[[file:https://img.bascht.com/2018-blog/rubyonice-chart-income.png]]

We priced the sponsoring packages pretty high (2000€, 5000€, 7500€ and one /free
style/) but in the end we where happy the way we calculated them. Setting the
prices lower might have attracted a few more sponsors but would have also
increased the workload we had in managing the sponsoring agreements.

What helped us in the end: We set up pretty pessimistic prospectives for
sponsoring packages and always calculated with a 20% buffer so we could afford
to negotiate with sponsors:

[[file:https://img.bascht.com/2018-blog/sponsoring-budget-security.png]]


That being said: We managed to get really amazing companies to support our
conference and were pretty happy to have them aboard. (And: No – this compliment
is not part of a sponsoring deal).

To kickstart ticket sales we started with an early bird price of =220€= and
progressed to a regular ticket price of =330€= (incl. taxes).

* Ticket sale timeline

We opened up our ticket sale in October 2017 with our early bird sale and sold
our last ticket on Friday evening when the conference had already started:

#+ATTR_HTML: :class goorgeous
[[file:https://img.bascht.com/2018-blog/rubyonice-ticketsales.png]]

The first few hours of opening the ticket sale felt great. Look at those
engagement numbers! The second bump at the beginning of November was the end of
our early bird sale.

And this brings us to our next ticket pricing lesson: /Try to not lose money on
early bird tickets/.



* Cost distribution

[[file:https://img.bascht.com/2018-blog/rubyonice-chart-expenses.png]]

* Takeaways

** Be careful with the Early Bird tickets

** More Newsletters

** Diversity Tickets




My personal relation with Hugo [[https://git.bascht.space/bascht/bascht.com/commit/75ae9c346694686f1d05a5839df6a4c23e628260][has been a mixed bag]] but so far I'm still happy
with it - especially since it [[http://bepsays.com/en/2017/02/27/hugo-019/][supports native =org-mode=]] with version 0.19.

** Mind the sponsoring *goodies*
** Sponsoring deal Buffer + less sponsors 
